rfc: intelligent resampling in monty (#366)
thousandbrainsproject/tbp.monty: rfcs/0000_intelligent_resampling.md

- Start Date: 2025-07-08
- RFC PR: (leave this empty, it will be filled in after RFC is merged)

# Intelligent Resampling in Monty

This is a high-level RFC on intelligence resampling in Monty, considering the below three questions:

1. How can we realign hypotheses to model points for robustness to noise and distortions?
2. How can we implement and test resampling informed by out-of-reference-frame movement?
3. How can we use prediction errors in off-object observations to eliminate hypotheses? 

> ## Note on Terminology

Reviewer: **suggestion:** I would put all of this under the `How can we realign ...` section, since it's not very relevant for the other two sections.

In neuroscience, the term "re-anchoring" may be used broadly. In this RFC, we divide re-anchoring into either:

> 1. **Remapping** - when we re-anchor to a new object
> 2. **Realignment** - when we re-anchor to correct for phase and orientation within a reference frame

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Remapping** - when we re-anchor to a new object, i.e. a different reference frame
2. **Realignment** - when we re-anchor to correct for location (_phase_ in biology) and orientation within a reference frame
```

> This RFC primarily focuses on realignment of hypotheses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This part of the RFC primarily focuses on realignment of hypotheses.
```

@dataclass
class Hypotheses:
    """Set of hypotheses consisting of evidence, locations, and poses.

    The three arrays are expected to have the same shape. Each index corresponds to a
    hypothesis.
    """

    evidence: np.ndarray # numpy array of confidence scores
    locations: np.ndarray # numpy array of 3D positions in the object's reference frame
    poses: np.ndarray # numpy array of 3x3 rotation matrices, shape
```

**Current limitation:** When a hypothesis is initialized, its `poses` attribute remains fixed. While we can create new hypotheses with different poses, these start from zero evidence and require time to accumulate confidence.

**Objective:** Implement a mechanism to update the location or pose of existing hypotheses without resetting their accumulated evidence values.

### Feature Matching for Hypothesis Realignment

At a high level, realigning a hypothesis involves matching **observed features** to **stored features** in object models. If a unique match is found, we can update the hypothesis location and pose to match the stored object model.

Below we work through some key questions and implications:

#### How can we meaningfully compare features?

> The comparison method depends on the specific feature type. For now, we can leverage existing code in the `check_feature_change()` method of the `FeatureChangeSM` class. As of `tbp.monty==0.8.0`, we have the following distance definitions for `hsv` and `pose_vectors`:

Reviewer: **note:** Is there a reason you are using the SM feature-matching here? The matching in `FeatureChangeSM` determines whether a feature is going to be shared with the LM. It isn't what underlies the feature matching to learned models within an evidence-based LM. The latter is much closer to the kind of stored-feature match that we want re-alignment to rely on. See e.g. `_calculate_evidence_for_new_locations` and `DefaultFeatureEvidenceCalculator`.

```python
# HSV (line 717)
hue_d = min(abs(current_hue - last_hue), 1 - abs(current_hue - last_hue))

# Pose Vectors (line 729)
angle_between = get_angle(last_feat[0],current_feat[0],)
```

For a valid "match", all $N$ features must be similar within specified thresholds. _Why all?_ This requirement is necessary because partial matches can be uninformative, e.g., if `hsv` matches but `pose_vectors` do not, this provides little information for objects with uniform color (e.g., a red mug).

> **Note**: Future extensions of observed features in Monty should consider meaningful distance metrics. The examples above demonstrate cases where L2 distance is not suitable.  

Reviewer: **suggestion:** I would add some points specifically thinking about what you will do to a given $kth$ hypothesis to i) realign its location (straightforward) and/or ii) realign its rotation (hard).

As you note at the start, there is no method in Monty at the moment to update an object's rotation for a given hypothesis. However, this is something we could consider adding. For example, based the hypothesis at the new location, what is the minimal correction to the pose we would need to make, in order for our current sensory observation to be consistent with the stored representation? It may be helpful to checkout the code for how we initialize the rotation hypotheses.

#### What if there are multiple matches?

Multiple matches indicate that the observed feature set exists at multiple locations in the object model, i.e. the observed features are not sufficiently distinct. Increasing the number of measured features (larger $N$) reduces the likelihood of such "collisions." It is also not necessary to realign at every step - we may choose not to realign if there are multiple matches, and only realign if there is a unique match.

> **Note**: We may want to "mark" nodes in the graph object model when unique matches occur, indicating they contain distinctive features. These landmark nodes could be valuable for learning sparse object models and may improve computational efficiency (see below).

Reviewer: **praise:** I like this idea. Note these points will likely overlap with points that the hypothesis-testing policy identifies, particularly when we extend it to look for distance in feature-space, and not just L-2 3D space. We have previously discussed storing such frequently tested points, and they could serve complementary roles - i.e. these points are useful for both identifying what object you are observing (hypothesis-testing policy), and where you are on the object (re-alignment when uncertain).

#### What if there are no matches?

> This scenario may occur during inference when sensor noise exceeds the matching threshold. We could temporarily increase the matching threshold to find a match, penalizing the evidence proportionally to the threshold increase required. The simplest/initial implementation may consider skipping "no match" cases (i.e., no realignment), though this mechanism could potentially be used to decrease evidence scores.

Reviewer: **note:** As mentioned above, I think we would want to avoid re-implementing the matching mechanisms we already have in place within LMs. It should be more about selecting the right threshold for what constitutes a unique match. In that case, things like this aren't unique to re-alignment (they effect feature matching during inference more generally), and so I don't think this is something we need to address here.

#### Computational Complexity

Re-anchoring can be computationally expensive due to two factors: (1) the number of observed features (more features require more distance calculations), and (2) the number of nodes in the object model (more nodes require more comparisons).

Currently, case 1 is not a major concern since we only have "few" features (e.g. `rgba` and `pose_vectors`). However, future implementations should consider efficient distance calculations and prioritizing feature subsets. For example, comparing `rgba` for a uniformly colored object (like a red mug) provides little discriminative value.

> Case 2 is more concerning until we develop sparser models. We should benchmark comparison times against ~2,000 points in an object model. Potential optimizations include:

Reviewer: **note:** We already do this kind of comparison when we initialize our models (i.e. when we don't yet have a specific location that we believe we are at). One consideration that could help is that we would only consider re-anchoring if we are in the condition of i) high confidence but ii) large prediction error (see "surprise" metric under Ramy's RFC). This would be the case if we are pretty sure we are on the logo, but it is bending. If we don't know what object we are on in the first place (low confidence), or our predictions are good (low prediction error), then there is no need to re-align.

> - **Local search**: Compare only points within an $\epsilon$-radius of the current location, assuming realignment targets nearby points. This is valid if we realign frequently to prevent large error accumulation.

Reviewer: **praise:** These are both good ideas. The first one (locality) might be hard to tune, because in some instances the distortion might be quite extreme. Maybe if we have very high confidence about the object ID, we would give it the benefit of the doubt and allow for a larger search area.

- **Landmark prioritization**: Prioritize comparisons with nodes previously "marked" as containing unique features. 

#### How can sparse models affect location accuracy?

> In sparse models, the nearest stored point might be significantly distant from the actual location. Several mitigation strategies are possible:

Reviewer: **suggestion:** I would discuss more the points we talked about here where sparse, distinctive features by definition are going to map to a correct point in the model, in contrast to non-distinct, sparse representations, like what we might find representing a broad surface.

1. **Constrained re-anchoring**: Limit re-anchoring to points within an $\epsilon$-radius to prevent large positional jumps.

2. **Interpolation**: Instead of snapping to existing model points, re-anchor to an intermediate position between the hypothesis location and the model location. The interpolation weight could be based on feature matching confidence, which can be proportional to distance error when comparison features. This may create a "virtual anchor point", i.e. a point not necessarily stored in the model (to preserve sparsity) while still benefiting from re-anchoring.

For sparse models, matching only when features are distinctive becomes even more critical.

#### What are the implications for unsupervised learning?

> Re-anchoring during unsupervised learning has several important implications that require careful consideration. Re-anchoring changes where we think we are 

Reviewer: **suggestion:** It would be worth discussing the _benefits_ of re-alignment for learning (unsupervised or otherwise). The reality is that our path integration is likely to be noisy. Relying on landmarks to reduce noise is a good idea, but of course becomes a circular problem because what if the landmark locations in the model were informed by noisy path integration. This is the philosophy of SLAM - that you iterative update your locations of landmarks in the model, while also using them to refine your path integration. Over time, this smooths out the noise from bad path integration. I would expand on these concepts here.

2. **Delayed re-anchoring**: To increase confidence in re-anchoring decisions, we could **delay** re-anchoring until multiple consistent feature matches are observed across several steps. This approach may also better reflects real-world experiences, where we may accumulate/experience features at several locations (or across time in case of looking at objects through straws) - the relative positions of multiple features and experiential history provide stronger localization cues than a single distinctive feature match. 

## How can we implement and test resampling informed by out-of-reference-frame movement?

The aim of this question is to eliminate hypotheses when they have moved outside the object's reference frame. Figure 1 illustrates this scenario.

<img src="./0000_intelligent_resampling/out_of_reference_frame_movement.png" alt="Out of reference frame movement" style="width:80%; height:auto; display: block; margin: 0 auto;"/>
_Figure 1_. Case where hypothesis has moved out of object's reference frame. 

### Implementation Strategy

> We propose eliminating hypotheses that are more than 10% away from the object's boundary. This percentage threshold is arbitrary but was chosen as a relative distance (rather than a fixed distance like 3 cm) to accommodate objects of different sizes. This elimination step should occur after updating hypotheses but before the next sensing step. 

Reviewer: **praise:** Good idea thinking about how to handle objects of different sizes.

**thought:** I'm not sure what would happen if we are learning a new object that isn't spatially continuous. I think there are instances where humans would still perceive this as a single object as long as the parts (which might be separated in space) are moving in a co-aligned fashion. I'm not saying we need to solve this now, but just something to think about.

Reviewer 2: **question**: I guess this means computing some entire-object properties at some point? Like computing some object properties "offline". We haven't really gone down this route. I've thought about it in terms of object symmetry, but I was never sure if "precomputing" or computing object properties offline is objectionable on principle.

### Computational Complexity

A naive approach would find the nearest point and determine if it exceeds the distance threshold. To minimize the computational cost of nearest-point searches, we propose approximating the object model with a convex hull and comparing only against the points that constitute this hull.

Figure 2 demonstrates this concept using a 2D example. While object model points exist in 3D space, the convex hull optimization principle remains applicable.

<img src="./0000_intelligent_resampling/convex_hull_example_naive.png" alt="Naive approach" style="width:45%; height:auto;"/> <img src="./0000_intelligent_resampling/convex_hull_example_convex_hull.png" alt="Convex hull approach" style="width:45%; height:auto;"/>
_Figure 2_. **Left**: Naive approach requires comparing distances to all ~2,000 points in the object model to determine if a hypothesis is out of reference frame. **Right**: Convex hull approach pre-computes a convex hull (after training or during pre-epoch in inference) and reduces comparisons to only the hull's points.

> While sparse models may reduce this computational burden, the convex hull approach should still provide significant performance improvements. 

Reviewer: **praise:** Good idea re. the convex hull.

## How can we use prediction errors in off-object observations to eliminate hypotheses? 

> Figure 3 illustrates two types of prediction errors that may arise in Monty and can be used to eliminate hypotheses.

Reviewer: **suggestion:** To bring even more clarity, you might show Case 1 where i) we move onto another object (which may also be the "background" of the environment, and ii) we have a sensor (like the finger) that is "blind" unless in direct contact with an object, and so it may genuinely be sensing nothing.

<img src="./0000_intelligent_resampling/predicion_error.png" alt="Prediction errors in Monty" style="width:70%; height:auto; display: block; margin: 0 auto;"/>

> _Figure 3_. Two cases where prediction errors may arise in Monty.

Reviewer: **nitpick:** The formatting here looks off.

### Case 1: Hypothesis believes it is within an object but has actually moved off the object

**Note**: There is also a scenario where the hypothesis has moved off one object and landed on another object. This can be handled by Case 2, since features sensed from a different object will presumably result in large prediction errors.

> To compute prediction errors, we need a representation of "null" observations. We define "null" features as the absence of **morphological** features (surface normal and principal curvatures), since depending on the sensing modality (vision or touch), not all **non-morphological features** may be detected.

Reviewer: **praise:** I like the emphasis on morphological features as defining null.

    ) = self.extract_and_add_features(
        features,
        obs_3d,
        rgba_feat,
        depth_feat,
        center_id,
        center_row_col,
        sensor_frame_data,
        world_camera,
    )
else:
    invalid_signals = True
    morphological_features = {}

...

observed_state = State(
    location=np.array([x, y, z]),
    morphological_features=morphological_features,
    non_morphological_features=features, # Note: This may throw an error since 'features' is undefined in off-object cases
    confidence=1.0,
    use_state=bool(morphological_features["on_object"]) and not invalid_signals,
    sender_id=self.sensor_module_id,
    sender_type="SM",
)
```

**Proposed representation**: To enable meaningful prediction error calculations, we may use some default null values that maintain consistent data structure:

```python
NULL_MORPHOLOGICAL_FEATURES = {
    "pose_vectors": np.array([np.nan, np.nan, np.nan]),
    "principal_curvatures": np.array([np.nan, np.nan]),
    "mean_curvature": np.nan,
    "gaussian_curvature": np.nan,
    "on_object": False,
}
```
This representation ensures that all observations have consistent keys regardless of on/off-object status.

> **Note**: Off-object observations should trigger FeatureChangeSM but **should not create new nodes in the object model**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Off-object observations should trigger FeatureChangeSM but **should not create new nodes in the object model during learning.**
```

    logger.debug(f"No new point because not on object")
    return False
```

Expected behavior with the proposed changes:
- **On-object to on-object**: Feature changes will continue to work as currently implemented
- **On-object to off-object (and vice versa)**: Will be treated as significant changes; the learning module will receive "null" features when transitioning from on-object to off-object
- **Off-object to off-object**: Same as on-object to on-object - there should be no feature change (may need to handle different in NaN values)

**3. How `on_object` is used in SM**

- The `on_object` is set to `float(semantic_id > 0)` where `semantic_id` indicates if an object is detected at the sensor's center point
- The `use_state` flag combines `on_object` status AND signal validity
```python
use_state=bool(morphological_features["on_object"]) and not invalid_signals
```
A `False` value currently prevents null observations from being processed by LM. With the proposed RFC, this should only be set to False when we go from off-object to off-object transition.

### When we're learning an object, we don't have a complete graph model. How do we deal with this?

> During object learning, we lack a complete graph model, creating challenges for prediction error interpretation. Prediction errors can signal both the need to eliminate hypotheses and the need to update the model. I think one way to go about this is to store a `num_visited` in nodes of object models (similar to if were to add `is_distinct` during realignment in Question 1). This informaton can be utilized to see if the prediction error is occuring at a point where it has been visited frequently or not - if visited frequently, then it is likely a prediction error. If not, then it may just be a part of the model that hasn't been explored enough. 

Reviewer: **note:** I think this is along the right track. Although we won't need to solve it with a first implementation, you might just want to check out the language in the GridObjectModels - there is a similar concept to `num_visited` I believe that could be worth referencing here.

**Note**: We may want to "mark" nodes in the graph object model when unique matches occur, indicating they contain distinctive features. These landmark nodes could be valuable for learning sparse object models and may improve computational efficiency (see below).

#### Computational Complexity

Re-anchoring can be computationally expensive due to three factors: (1) the number of observed features (more features require more distance calculations), (2) the number of nodes in the object model (more nodes require more comparisons), and (3) the number of hypotheses we want to re-anchor. 

Currently, case 1 is not a major concern since we only have "few" features (e.g. `rgba` and `pose_vectors`). However, future implementations should consider efficient distance calculations and prioritizing feature subsets. For example, comparing `rgba` for a uniformly colored object (like a red mug) provides little discriminative value.

Case 2 is more concerning until we develop sparser models. We should benchmark comparison times against ~2,000 points in an object model. Potential optimizations include:

> - **Local search**: Compare only points within an $\epsilon$-radius of the current location, assuming realignment targets nearby points. This is valid if we realign frequently to prevent large error accumulation. Note that we may need to dynamically adjust $\epsilon$ to increase search area in case of large distortions. 

Reviewer 3: Hm that's an interesting point. I am not sure if we would do reanchoring if the distance is large and there is no connective tissue. In the case of the bent logo, we can smoothly follow the logo as it bends and make small local adjustments. If we saccade directly from the logo mark to the bent end of the logo, I would argue that we don't recognize it as the same object instance at first. We would recognize the logo again at a different orientation but I would think that it would be a new hypothesis and not a continuation of the previously sensed logo. Only when we see that the two are connected (i.e. small local distortions) can we model them as the same object. I think we will get a lot of weird behavior if we allow model features to connect over arbitrarily large distances.

- **Landmark prioritization**: Prioritize comparisons with nodes previously "marked" as containing unique features. This approach directly relates to hypothesis-testing policy target points, where we identify and reuse distinctive landmark features that rapidly disambiguate between similar objects or poses. For more details on this future work direction, see [Reuse Hypothesis-Testing Policy Target Points](https://thousandbrainsproject.readme.io/docs/reuse-hypothesis-testing-policy-target-points). 

For Case 3, we can apply:
- **Selective re-anchoring**: Apply re-anchoring only to hypotheses exhibiting both high confidence and large prediction error, as described by the "surprise" metric in [Ramy's RFC](https://github.com/thousandbrainsproject/tbp.monty/pull/390). This approach reduces computational overhead by avoiding unnecessary comparisons for low-confidence hypotheses or cases with low prediction error.

> Of the above three options, I think **selective re-anchoring** should be prioritized first, then **landmark prioritization**. Note that **landmark prioritization** will require us to update our object model's nodes to store "important" attributes first. 

Reviewer 3: I think it should still work with sparse models. As the models get sparser we can always adjust the search radius if necessary. Also, the search radius takes into account the point normal and curvature such that it searches further along the surface of the object and less far in the direction of the point normal (https://thousandbrainsproject.readme.io/docs/evidence-based-learning-module#search-radius-and-distance-weighting).

Regarding the computational efficiency:
- We only look at the k nearest neighbor at the radius which is usually set to 5 or 10
- If we use the already existing calculation of feature and morphology match, we are not adding any additional computational complexity beyond updating the hypothesized location
- I'm not opposed to still thresholding which hypotheses we reanchor and only considering the most likely ones for that, just because it seems like it won't make a big difference to reanchor low probability ones. But, I think this will be an imperican question and the number of available hypotheses at each step may change a lot with the changes Ramy is making.

This approach extends the current hypothesis initialization logic (which determines initial poses based on sensor observations) to allow pose updates during realignment. 

#### What are the implications for unsupervised learning?

The benefits of re-alignment extend beyond immediate hypothesis correction to fundamental improvements in learning. In biology, path integration is inherently noisy due to imperfect sensors and movement estimates. Re-alignment using distinctive features acts as a corrective mechanism, similar to how landmarks are used in Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) algorithms.

A crucial aspect of SLAM is its bootstrapping nature, which creates a positive feedback loop:

- **Models inform path integration**: As object models become more complete and accurate, they provide better landmarks for re-alignment, correcting drift in path integration
- **Path integration informs models**: Corrected position estimates (via re-alignment) lead to more accurate placement of new features in the model, improving model quality

The bidirectional relationship enables unsupervised learning where both localization and mapping improve together over time.

> In lifelong SLAM and multi-session SLAM, robots continuously operate in varied and changing environments without prior knowledge of what environment they are in. In these cases, a robot must detect whether it has moved into a new environment (e.g. indoor to outdoor) or is revisiting the same environment under different conditions (e.g. day vs. night). This is achieved through _continuous loop closure detection_, where robots monitor and detect previously visited places by comparing features from the current scene to all previously encountered locations. Like in our hypotheses realignment problem, robots need to prevent false positives in matching, as re-anchoring changes where we think we are, which could lead to missing parts or distorted object models. 

Reviewer 3: Nice, thanks! I will have a read :)

There are several techniques to mitigate false positives: 

1. Extract more and distinctive features.
2. Require matches across multiple features simultaneously (i.e. multi-modal matching across vision and touch).

> 3. Temporal consistency across multiple timesteps. To increase confidence in re-anchoring decisions, we could **delay** re-anchoring until multiple consistent feature matches are observed across several steps. This approach may also better reflect real-world experiences, where we may accumulate/experience features at several locations (or across time in case of looking at objects through straws) - the relative positions of multiple features and experiential history provide stronger localization cues than a single distinctive feature match. 

Reviewer: Yeah maybe one way to think of this is re-anchoring / transferring evidence to a recently created hypothesis. Normally (no realignment) if we observed the sequence you described Hojae, then as Viviane said, the existing algorithm will eliminate/reduce the hypotheses associated with other tires. 

However in this case, the car component (tire-mirror-etc) is in a new location for whatever reason (distortion, path integration noise etc), and we want to _re-align_ to that position. My understanding of your proposal would be that this would be more robust if we accumulate evidence over multiple steps to trigger alignment, rather than just using the signal of "wheel". 

Practically speaking, this would be something like: 
i) When sensing the new tire (at an unexpected location due to noise or distorted car) --> sample a new hypothesis, using Ramy's resampling work; initially it will have low evidence.
ii) If the evidence starts to accumulate quickly for this new hypothesis (slope etc), then we *transfer* the high evidence score of our MLH to this new location (this evidence score will likely be much higher). This is the re-alignment step. Unlike typical re-alignment, it relies on the fact that we have accumulated several steps of evidence with a new hypothesis, and use this new hypothesis as the target re-alignment location.

This is a bit of a complex process, and may have unexpected effects, so it's probably not worth doing early on. It might be an interesting idea to revisit if we find re-alignment isn't robust enough. The same effect might be handled more naturally by having hierarchy, such that at a location in the reference frame, we will be getting a quite specific object ID (e.g. front of car).

I'm happy if we remove it, but just checking @vkakerbeck you are happy with this reasoning and I haven't misunderstood something?

> 4. Frequency control: The re-anchoring frequency should be a configurable parameter. We may need to disable re-anchoring during early exploration phases until sufficient steps have been taken, or adjust frequency of re-anchoring inversely proportional to number of steps.

Reviewer 3: Maybe I confused what you mean with "during early exploration phases" I thought you meant early within one episode but reading your comment now it sounds like you mean in the beginning of an entire experiment when we are just starting to learn about all objects. Is that right? In that case I could imagine having less reanchoring when the object model hasn't been fully learned yet. I guess in that case I am still confused about "there are just a lot more number of hypotheses in earlier steps" since this again seems to refer to the beginning of an episode (matching phase). 
Either way, I think we don't need to be too worried about finding highly distinct features across objects. I think for this local reanchoring, a good local match between sensend and stored features should be sufficient for the small hypothesis adjustments we are talking about. I don't think we need globally unique features for this to be useful.

> 4. Frequency control: The re-anchoring frequency should be a configurable parameter. We may need to disable re-anchoring during early exploration phases until sufficient steps have been taken, or adjust frequency of re-anchoring inversely proportional to number of steps.

Reviewer: Yeah my understanding was that this was referring to unsupervised learning. I could see some degenerate cases where e.g. a model has learned one point, moves to another location, and this location happens to have the same features (assume they are not unique). Because the LM only has one point in the model, it incorrectly re-anchors to the earlier location. I think this is (an extreme example of) the issue you were getting at Hojae? Maybe we just leave it as a to-be-aware that re-anchoring frequency/triggers may need particular attention during unsupervised learning? I agree that a solution which isn't too bespoke would be preferable.

**Current limitation**: In the current implementation, off-object observations are not passed to the Learning Module (LM). The `FeatureChangeSM` class filters out observations where `on_object` is False, preventing the LM from using these observations for hypothesis elimination. This means we cannot currently leverage all types of prediction errors for intelligent resampling.

Below we examine two types of prediction errors that may arise in Monty and could be used to eliminate hypotheses if we modify how sensory observations are processed and forwarded.

### Case 1: Hypothesis believes it is within an object but has actually moved off the object

<img src="./0000_intelligent_resampling/prediction_error_case1.png" alt="Prediction Error Case 1" style="width:80%; height:auto; display: block; margin: 0 auto;"/>

> _Figure 4_. Two scenarios where a hypothesis believes it remains on the object but has actually moved off. **Case 1a (top)**: The sensor moves off the mug onto background or another object. **Case 1b (bottom)**: The sensor moves off the mug into empty space, sensing nothing (particularly relevant for touch sensors).

Reviewer 3: I was referring to the processing we do on the input where we mask points as off object that are on one side of a bimodal depth value distribution (which would mask background in a vision sensor). Here are some visualizations of this https://thousandbrains.discourse.group/t/sensor-fundamentals/634/3
But this only works if half of the sensor is still on the object and not of we completely move onto the background or another object so your note is still important. I just wanted to clarify & make sure you are aware that this processing is happening.

> _Figure 4_. Two scenarios where a hypothesis believes it remains on the object but has actually moved off. **Case 1a (top)**: The sensor moves off the mug onto background or another object. **Case 1b (bottom)**: The sensor moves off the mug into empty space, sensing nothing (particularly relevant for touch sensors).

Reviewer: Yeah this doesn't make any assumptions about us detecting we are "off-object". Basically we will just sense something (a different object, the table, a wall, etc.) --> passing this should be sufficient to create a prediction error in this scenario.

**Proposed representation**: To enable meaningful prediction error calculations, we may use some default null values that maintain consistent data structure:

```python
NULL_MORPHOLOGICAL_FEATURES = {
    "pose_vectors": np.array([np.nan, np.nan, np.nan]),
    "principal_curvatures": np.array([np.nan, np.nan]),
    "mean_curvature": np.nan,
    "gaussian_curvature": np.nan,
    "on_object": False,
}
```
This representation ensures that all observations have consistent keys regardless of on/off-object status.

**Note**: Off-object observations should trigger FeatureChangeSM but **should not create new nodes in the object model**

### Case 2: Hypothesis remains within the object but expected features are incorrect due to location or pose mismatch

<img src="./0000_intelligent_resampling/prediction_error_case2.png" alt="Prediction Error Case 2" style="width:80%; height:auto; display: block; margin: 0 auto;"/>

_Figure 5_. Hypothesis remains within the object boundaries but at an incorrect location. The hypothesis believes it moved from the mug body to the handle, but actually moved to a different location on the body. This location mismatch results in incorrect feature predictions.

> This scenario is already handled by the existing `hypotheses_displacer.py`, which computes evidence based on feature mismatches. No changes are needed for Case 2, except to handle null observations from Case 1b.

Reviewer 3: Why would we get null observations in this case? As far as I can see Case 2 is irrelevant to this question as it is already completely handled by the current algorithm.

### Implications for FeatureChangeSM

**Current limitation**: As mentioned earlier, `FeatureChangeSM` currently filters out off-object observations, preventing the LM from receiving them. This filtering happens in the `check_feature_change()` method, which returns `False` for off-object observations. To enable prediction error-based hypothesis elimination for null observations (Case 1b), we need to modify how `FeatureChangeSM` handles these observations.

> The following changes would be made to `sensor_module.py`:

Reviewer 3: I don't see a change here. This looks like the original code.

- **Off-object to off-object**: Same as on-object to on-object - there should be no feature change (may need to handle different in NaN values)

**3. How `on_object` is used in SM**

- The `on_object` is set to `float(semantic_id > 0)` where `semantic_id` indicates if an object is detected at the sensor's center point
- The `use_state` flag combines `on_object` status AND signal validity
```python
use_state=bool(morphological_features["on_object"]) and not invalid_signals
```
A `False` value currently prevents null observations from being processed by LM. With the proposed RFC, this should only be set to False when we go from off-object to off-object transition.

### When we're learning an object, we don't have a complete graph model. How do we deal with this?

During object learning, prediction errors present a complex decision point: they may indicate (1) incorrect hypotheses that should be eliminated, (2) an incomplete model that needs updating, or (3) both. These interpretations are not mutually exclusive - a large prediction error might mean we should eliminate current hypotheses AND learn or update our models.

> This challenge becomes particularly complex when learning and inference are interleaved, or when the distinction between "pure learning" and "pure inference" modes is not clearly defined. In pure inference mode, we may use prediction errors to eliminate hypotheses assuming the object model is considered complete. In pure learning mode, prediction errors may indicate model needs updating since the model is incomplete.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This challenge becomes particularly complex when learning and inference are interleaved. In evaluation mode (no model updates), we may use prediction errors to eliminate hypotheses assuming the object model is considered complete. In learning mode, prediction errors may indicate model needs updating since the model is incomplete.
```

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure this paragraph is useful. It seems like the same issues would happen in learning and evaluation mode. The only difference may be if we assume that we only evaluate on complete models but I'm not sure this assumption is useful.

> The key challenge is deciding whether to:

Reviewer 3: I wrote a bit about this in this document on graph learning in Monty (page 19) https://www.overleaf.com/project/627cb681638ce318bb2fdd1f

<img width="683" height="580" alt="Screenshot 2025-07-31 at 11 19 15 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/166c1f1b-17ea-40fb-86e0-e871056db397" />

I think especially since this RFC is already proposing to send and use off-object observations to the LM (when switching from on to off), we should consider actually using those to define the end of an object and use this to distinguish between moving off the object and moving into an unlearned region of the object. Storing those in the model could also help with 2 in that we would get a very clear feature mismatch between on and off object observations of the nearest note in the graph (as opposed to just a large distance to the nearest node)

Reviewer: Just following on our discussion in the 1:1 yesterday @vkakerbeck , I think if we can get some good heuristics for the transition, then that could be interesting to sort of store just along the edges, but I think there might be some challenges. For example:
1) If we saccade (larger jump) to an off-object location, how do we know where the empty-space point begins?
2) Does this assume the "off-object" observations are "null" observations - this is only really true for touch. Vision pretty much always gets something as input. 
3) If we use something like surface normals, how does this apply to complex 3D objects, or 2D images, where normals/edges might be "within" the object.

- Learn an entirely new object model (when encountering a truly novel object)
- Update an existing model; this might be necessary when encountering a known object in a new setting (e.g. different lighting), if the model is incomplete (e.g. unexplored part), or it has changed (e.g., your favorite mug now has a chip in it)
- Simply eliminate incorrect hypotheses (when the models are sufficient but we're at the wrong location/on a different object)

> To treat learning and inference as lying on a continuum, we can utilize metadata stored in object models as a proxy/heuristic to use prediction errors in one way or another. Heuristics may be:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To deal with continuous learning and refinement of potentially incomplete models, we can utilize metadata stored in object models as a proxy/heuristic to use prediction errors in one way or another. Heuristics may be:
```

- **Feature-specific patterns**: If morphological features match but non-morphological features (like color) differ significantly, this might indicate object variations / keyframe / need to separate morphological and feature models.

#### Example of Chipped Coffee Mug 

Consider the TBP mug that we are very familiar that is now slightly chipped. Below are how the above heuristics may apply:

1. **Initial detection**: When sensing the chipped area, we would get prediction errors since the surface geometry differs from our stored model.
2. **Hypothesis coverage**: The hypothesis for where we are on the mug would remain valid across many locations during movement (handle, sides, rim); it would only result in a prediction error / risk elimination when we move to the chip, the point at which we would want to signal learning in a model.
3. **Observation frequency**: The mug model has high observation counts from frequent use, suggesting we shouldn't discard the entire model.

> 4. **Feature patterns**: Morphological features (surface curvature) would differ at the chip location, but non-morphological features (color, texture) might remain consistent.

Reviewer 3: Why would color and texture stay the same? If it is chipped then those would be gone too, right?

5. **Compositionality**: Since the chip is a localized modification at specific coordinates on an otherwise familiar object, the system could learn it compositionally - preserving the original mug model while learning the chip as a local variation.

> 6. **Decision**: The heuristics would guide the system to learn the chipped area as a compositional modification rather than corrupting the well-learned base mug model. This allows us to maintain our knowledge about the standard mug shape while capturing this specific instance's variation. The lower-level mug model remains intact and reusable, while the chip information is stored as a localized modification.

Reviewer 3: This seems to go into a new direction from the original question of this RFC ("How do we update a model if the object changed?" vs. "How can we use prediction errors to eliminate hypotheses when the sensor has moved off of an object? ". I would give an example here that tackles that specific question you set out with.

    R_correction = align_multiple_orthonomral_vectors(current_pose_vectors.reshape(1, 3, 3), observed_pose_vectors)
    
    # Update hypothesis pose
    hypothesis_k.poses[k] = R_correction @ R_current
```

Note that we could also use `R_correction` to see if we should reject re-anchoring, e.g. if the angle associatd with `R_correction` is larger than some threshold then it might mean we had a false match. 

This approach extends the current hypothesis initialization logic (which determines initial poses based on sensor observations) to allow pose updates during realignment. 

**Minor Side Note**: If the above approach works, we could likely remove the following code where we sample from Von Mises distribution.
```python
for _ in range(n_samples):
    # If we do this we need a better terminal condition for similar
    # rotations or more robustness. n_sample currently set to 0.
    rand_rot = self.rng.vonmises(0, kappa, 3)
    rot = Rotation.from_euler(
        "xyz", [rand_rot[0], rand_rot[1], rand_rot[2]]
    )
    r_sample = r * rot
```

#### What are the implications for unsupervised learning?

> The benefits of re-alignment extend beyond immediate hypothesis correction to fundamental improvements in learning. In biology, path integration is inherently noisy due to imperfect sensors and movement estimates. Re-alignment using distinctive features acts as a corrective mechanism, similar to how landmarks are used in Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) algorithms.

Reviewer: **suggestion:** Thanks for adding some more points on SLAM. I feel like this still doesn't comment on the bootstrapping nature of SLAM, i.e. that models are used to inform noisy path integration, but also path integration (+/- re-alignment) is used to inform model updates. I think making note of this would be useful, as its an important part of the unsupervised nature of it.

A match involves comparisons between features. The `_calculate_evidence_for_new_locations()` in `hypotheses_displacer.py` already computes the error between stored pose features and observed pose features, as well as non-morphological features (also see `class DefaultFeatureEvidenceCalculator` in `calculator.py`), weighted by distance to nearest nodes. This RFC and initial implementation will not be concerned with changing how we compute feature similarity/error.

> For a valid "match", all $N$ features must be similar within specified thresholds, but weighted by their discriminative value. _Why all?_ This requirement is necessary because partial matches can be uninformative, e.g., if `rgba` matches but `pose_vectors` do not, this provides little information for objects with uniform color (e.g., a red mug). Morphological features should receive high priority to main shape bias. Non-morphological features (e.g. color) may be weighted by their spatial variance, e.g. if an object has uniform color, then it has very low variance, which means it should have near-zero weight, while a distinctive red patch gets high weight. This ensures we don't reject good shape matches due to uninformative color mismatches while still leveraging truly distinctive features. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a valid "match", all $N$ features must be similar within specified thresholds, but weighted by their discriminative value. _Why all?_ This requirement is necessary because partial matches can be uninformative, e.g., if `rgba` matches but `pose_vectors` do not, this provides little information for objects with uniform color (e.g., a red mug). Morphological features should receive high priority to maintain shape bias. Non-morphological features (e.g. color) may be weighted by their spatial variance, e.g. if an object has uniform color, then it has very low variance, which means it should have near-zero weight, while a distinctive red patch gets high weight. This ensures we don't reject good shape matches due to uninformative color mismatches while still leveraging truly distinctive features. 
```

### Implementation Strategy

The existing `_calculate_evidence_for_new_locations()` method in `hypotheses_displacer.py` already provides a mechanism for handling out-of-reference-frame hypotheses through the `max_match_distance` parameter. 

1. **Distance-based evidence calculation**: For each hypothesis location, the method finds up to `max_nneighbors` nearest points in the object model using a KDTree
2. **Custom distance metric**: Instead of simple Euclidean distance, it uses `get_custom_distances()` which considers:
   - Spatial distance between hypothesis and stored points
   - Alignment of surface normals
   - Local curvature properties

> This creates an ellipsoidal region around each hypothesis that takes into account of the local curvature and the hypothesis' surface normal. Currently, if none of the nearest neighbors of the object models are in the ellipsoidal region, the hypothesis receives evidence of -1. We propose to simply extend this to remove these hypotheses. 

Reviewer 3: As a very first quick test before going too far down the path of implementing the removal of the hypotheses you can just change that line to -100 or some larger number which would be equivalent to removing the hypothesis. That should show us very quickly how this affects performance. If it is positive then we can add code to actually remove the hypothesis (to save computations when the x_percent_threshold is not used)
